Add audit helper devblog (#3057)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper.md

- **Clear output**: Audit_helper provides clear output showing how much of your refactored table matches the original one.
- **Visibility to a project**: Audit_helper gives visibility to a refactoring process by showing how your code is delivering the same results in both row-wise and column-wise comparisons.
- **Flexibility to compare rows and columns**: It is simple to quickly compare the results in rows or columns through pre-made templates that just require you to place your columns’ names and the original model’s ones.

Next, we provide instructions on how to install audit_helper in your dbt project, how to run row comparison (with the `compare_queries` macro), column comparison (with the `compare_column_values`) and provide some tips for audit_helper usage.

## Installation instructions
Let’s start by setting the stage for the audit_helper package to work in our project. It's important to note that the audit_helper package must run on dbt versions above or equal to 1.2.0 and below 2.0.0. Next, the two steps below will guide you on how to install and get audit_helper up and running.

> 1. First, add a `packages.yml` file to your dbt project, if you don't have one already. Inside the `packages.yml` file, add the audit_helper packabey by copying and pasting the code below. Note that this file should be at the same level as your `dbt_project.yml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. First, add a `packages.yml` file to your dbt project, if you don't have one already. Inside the `packages.yml` file, add the `audit_helper` package by copying and pasting the code below. Note that this file should be at the same level as your `dbt_project.yml` file.
```

    ```yaml
    packages:
    - package: dbt-labs/audit_helper

>     version: 0.7.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      version: 0.7.0
```

    ```

> 2. Run `dbt deps` in the command line to install the package(s). Packages get installed in the dbt_packages directory — by default this directory is ignored by git, to avoid duplicating the source code for the package.For more information on using packages in your dbt project, check out the dbt Documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Run `dbt deps` in the command line to install the package(s). Packages get installed in the `dbt_packages` directory — by default this directory is ignored by git, to avoid duplicating the source code for the package.For more information on using packages in your dbt project, check out [the dbt Documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/packages).
```

Reviewer: can we add a link [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/packages) at the end of this sentence?

> Now that audit_helper is installed, let’s talk about its two main macros: (i) `compare_queries` — to audit rows; and (ii) `compare_column_values` — to audit values in columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that audit_helper is installed, let’s talk about its two main macros: 
- `compare_queries` — to audit rows
- `compare_column_values` — to audit values in columns.
```

> ## Audit rows (compare_queries)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Audit rows (`compare_queries`)
```

> According to the audit_helper package documentation, this macro comes in handy when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to the `audit_helper` package documentation, this macro comes in handy when:
```

<Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper/image5.png" title="Figure 2 — Workflow of auditing rows (compare_queries) using audit_helper" />

As shown in the example, the model is compared line by line, and in this case, all lines in both models are equivalent and the result should be 100%. Figure 3 below depicts a row in which two of the three columns are equal and only the last column of row 1 has divergent values. In this case, despite the fact that most of row 1 is identical, that row will not be counted towards the final result. In this example, only row 2 and row 3 are valid, yielding a 66.6% match in the total of analyzed rows.

<Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper/image4.png" title="Figure 3 — Example of different values" />

As previously stated, for the match to be valid, all column values of a model’s row must be equal to the other model. This is why we sometimes need to exclude columns from the comparison (such as date columns, which can have a time zone difference from the original model to the refactored — we will discuss tips like these below).

> ### The code for the compare_queries macro: Step-by-step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The code for the `compare_queries` macro: Step-by-step
```

1. Create a new `.sql` model in the folder of your choice
2. Copy and paste the following example below in the model created:

```sql
{# in dbt Develop #}

{% set old_fct_orders_query %}
select
    id as order_id,
    amount,
    customer_id
from old_etl_schema.fct_orders
{% endset %}

{% set new_fct_orders_query %}
select
    order_id,
    amount,
    customer_id
from {{ ref('fct_orders') }}
{% endset %}

{{ audit_helper.compare_queries(
    a_query=old_fct_orders_query,
    b_query=new_fct_orders_query,
    primary_key="order_id"
) }}
```
Let’s understand the arguments used in the compare_queries macro:

> - **Primary_key** (optional): The model accepts a primary key as a comparison, but if the compared models lack one, you can create one or simply remove that line of code. Because this type of comparison evaluates all columns in a row, it will not show any difference if a primary key is not specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`primary_key`** (optional): The macro accepts a primary key argument to join the results of the queries together, but if the compared queries lack one, you can create one or simply remove that line of code. Because this type of comparison evaluates all values in a row, it will not show any difference if a primary key is not specified.
```

- **Summarize** (optional): This argument allows you to switch between a summary or detailed (verbose) view of the compared data. This argument accepts true or false values (its default is set to be true).

3. Replace the sources from the example with your own
    <Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper/image8.png" title="Figure 4 — Replace sources path" />

>     As illustrated in Figure 4, the “from” clause accepts the model path using the “ref” macro and the full <Term id="data-warehouse" /> path (which will be useful when you are refactoring a SQL Server Stored Procedure or Alteryx Workflow that is already being materialized in the data warehouse).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As illustrated in Figure 4, using the `ref` macro allows you to easily refer to your development model, and using the full <Term id="data-warehouse" /> path makes it easy to refer to the original table (which will be useful when you are refactoring a SQL Server Stored Procedure or Alteryx Workflow that is already being materialized in the data warehouse).
```

> 4. Replace the columns name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Specify your comparison columns
```

    <Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper/image6.png" title="Figure 5 — Delete and write columns name" />

>     Delete the example columns and replace them with the columns of your models, exactly as they are written in each model. You can rename the columns to make it more visually appealing, just make sure they are in the same order within the `select` clauses.

Reviewer: would argue you _should_ rename columns to match -- i think the macro may not work as intended if you don't, especially with primary key column names!

>     When there are a lot of columns in the data set, start with a few of them (say 5 columns) and run; when you get a good match, add more columns and run again. You can also comment the columns that you don’t want to compare using # before them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When there are a lot of columns in the data set, start with a few of them (say 5 columns) and run; when you get a good match, add more columns and run again. You can also easily comment the columns that you don’t want to compare!
```

    Commonly, when comparing many columns at once and getting a bad result, it is difficult to know which column the values are different from. However, as seen above, it is enough that the values are different in one of the columns to invalidate the line as a whole. As a result, we strongly advise you to start with a few columns and gradually add more columns as you get a good match. When a new column causes a drop in the match, examine the column in both models.

> 5. Run the audit model as you would run any other dbt model using the command below:

Reviewer: another option is to just compile and run the SQL -- it's not a requirement to materialize this as a model -- might be worth calling that out?

    `dbt run -select <name of your audit model>`

6. Check the result by copying and pasting the code below into your development environment:

    ```sql

>     select * from <name of your audit model>

Reviewer: might want this to be `{{ ref('<name of your audit model>') }} if this is being queried in the IDE!

    ```
    The output will be the similar to the one shown in Figure 6 below:

    <Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper/image2.png" title="Figure 6 — Output example of compare queries audit model" />    
    <br />
    The output is presented in table format, with each column explained below:
    <br />

>     - IN_A: Data present in model A <br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `IN_A`: Data present in model A <br />
```

>     - IN_B: Data present in model B <br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `IN_B`: Data present in model B <br />
```

>     - COUNT: Count of number of rows <br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `COUNT`: Count of number of rows <br />
```

>     - PERCENT_OF_TOTAL: Percentage of total for all rows <br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `PERCENT_OF_TOTAL`: Percentage of total for all rows <br />
```

    In the first row we can see `TRUE` in the column `IN_A` and `TRUE` in the column `IN_B`, which means that in both models, there are 1,966,215 rows with all columns matching values, accounting for 97.65% of the total. The second row shows 20,543 lines from model A that do not directly match with any row in model B, and the third row states conclusively that there are 26,720 lines from model B that do not directly match with any row in model A.

>     > Extra: To know the difference between them (in the example above, the cumulative 2.35% difference), join both of the sources using the primary key and put the same columns side by side, and use a `where` clause to help you find where one column is different from model A when compared with model B. This inspection can be a first step to determine the possible cause of error. We recommend analyzing one column at a time.

Reviewer: @KiraFuruichi should this be a info/callout instead of a quote?

> ## Audit columns (compare_column_values)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Audit columns (`compare_column_values`)
```

 <Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper/image7.png" title="Figure 7 — Workflow of auditing rows (compare_column_values) using audit_helper" />

The macro’s output summarizes the status of column compatibility, breaking it down into different categories: perfect match, both are null, values do not match, value is null in A only, value is null in B only, missing from A and missing from B. This level of detailing makes it simpler for the AE or data analyst to figure out what can be causing incompatibility issues between the models. While refactoring a model, it is common that some keys used to join models are inconsistent, bringing up unwanted null values on the final model as a result, and that would cause the audit row query to fail, without giving much more detail.

> With `compare_column_values` macro, the report output addresses specifically that problem, pointing out to the analyst which are the inconsistencies that may be causing low compatibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `compare_column_values` macro, the report output addresses specifically that problem, pointing out to the analyst what specific data inconsistencies exist.
```

> ### The code for the compare_column_values macro: Step-by-step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The code for the `compare_column_values` macro: Step-by-step
```

> 1. Create a new .sql model in the folder of your choice in your dbt project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new `.sql` model in the folder of your choice in your dbt project
```

2. Copy and paste the following example below in the model created:

```sql
{# in dbt Develop #}

{% set old_etl_relation_query %}
select * from public.dim_product
where is_latest
{% endset %}

{% set new_etl_relation_query %}
select * from {{ ref('dim_product') }}
{% endset %}

{% set audit_query = audit_helper.compare_column_values(
    a_query=old_etl_relation_query,
    b_query=new_etl_relation_query,
    primary_key="product_id",
    column_to_compare="status"
) %}

{% set audit_results = run_query(audit_query) %}

{% if execute %}
    {% do audit_results.print_table() %}
{% endif %}
```
  
The arguments used by this macro are pretty much the same used by the `compare_queries` macro, but with the addition of the `column_to_compare` argument, being that responsible, as the name suggests, for declaring which column is specifically going to be tested.

> Although similar to the compare_queries macro, this `compare_columns_value` macro gives great importance to the `primary_key` argument, which is going to be a fundamental part of generating correctly the metrics attributed to the compared column, acting as an anchor to compare every generated row from the refactored model with its legacy counterpart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `compare_columns_value` macro requires the `primary_key` argument, which is going to be a fundamental part of correctly generating the metrics attributed to the compared column, acting as an anchor to compare every row from the refactored model with its legacy counterpart.
```

> Also, we can see that there is a table printing option enabled as default, so the result of the query gets printed on the terminal when the macro is run. That can be useful to quickly check out the compatibility status of a column, without leaving the code editor while refactoring SQL through dbt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, we can see that the example code includes a table printing option enabled as default. This prints the result of the query in the terminal when the macro is run during dbt compilation step. That can be useful to quickly check out the compatibility status of a column, without leaving the code editor while refactoring SQL through dbt.
```

3. Replace column names and source references from the example with the respective information of the compared models.
4. Optional: Disable the `print_table()` command, so the model can be materialized on your data warehouse.
    To disable table printing on terminal and to enable model materialization in your target data warehouse, the following can be done: replace this entire section of code, which declares the SQL model as variable and makes it printable, with the macro execution pattern.

    ```sql
    - Replace the commented code below:
    - {% set audit_results = run_query(audit_query) %}

    - {% if execute %}
    - {% do audit_results.print_table() %}
    - {% endif %}

    - With the following piece of code:

>     {{ run_query(audit_query) }}

Reviewer: I would recommend not using run_query at all! All we need to do is print the query here, so  `{{ audit_query }}` should be sufficient

    ```

5. To get the results, you can simply run the model as you would with a regular dbt model using the following command:

    `dbt run -select <name of your audit model>`

>     But different from the `compare_queries` macro, if you have keep t he printing function enabled, you should expect a table to be printed in the command line when you run the model, as portrayed in Figure 8. Otherwise, it will be materialized on your data warehouse like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    But unlike from the `compare_queries` macro, if you have kept the printing function enabled, you should expect a table to be printed in the command line when you run the model, as shown in Figure 8. Otherwise, it will be materialized on your data warehouse like this:
```

     <Lightbox src="/img/blog/2023-03-23-audit-helper/image3.png" title="Figure 8 — Example of table printed in command line" />

    The `compare_column_values` macro separates column auditing results in seven different labels:

>     - **Perfect match**: count of rows (and relative percentage) where the column values compared between both tables are equal and not null;

Reviewer: i suggested code formatting for the previous macro column names -- bold is good too! I think they should be consistent either way!

    - **Both are null**: count of rows (and relative percentage) where column values compared between both tables are null;
    - **Missing from A**: count of rows (and relative percentage) with column values that exist in table B, but not in table A;
    - **Missing from B**: count of rows (and relative percentage) with column values that exist in table A, but not in table B;
    - **Value is null in A only**: count of rows (and relative percentage) with column values that are not null in table B but are null in table A;

>     - **Value is null in B only: count of rows (and relative percentage) with column values that are not null in table A but are null in table B**;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Value is null in B only**: count of rows (and relative percentage) with column values that are not null in table A but are null in table B;
```
